Design Doc: Visualize private S3 assets with Neuroglancer (#111)
lincbrain/linc-archive: doc/design/linc_permissions.md

> # Permissions for S3 Assets in LINC Archive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Access assets from private S3 bucket
```

Reviewer: Updated the title for this development to focus on visualization and not compute.

Author: Updated via a commit!

Collaborators: Aaron Kanzer, Kabilar Gunalan

## Requirements

> • As a CONNECTS developer, I shall be able to view multiple datasets/layers (e.g. dMRI, tractography, HiP-CT) in the same neuroglancer
> • As a CONNECTS developer, I shall be able to view data locally or on neuroglancer
> • As a CONNECTS developer, I shall be able to have direct access to S3 asset URI

Reviewer: My suggestions update the phrasing and change the order to signify the priority.

```suggestion
1. As a LINC developer, I shall be able to view multiple assets (e.g. dMRI, tractography, HiP-CT) in a single Neuroglancer viewer as layers.
2. As a LINC developer, I shall be able to implement Requirement 1 when Neuroglancer is hosted locally or in the cloud.
```

Reviewer: I moved the `direct access to S3 asset URI` requirement to a new section (i.e. `Implementation details`) as this would not be a user requirement, but rather a feature that would need to be implemented to satisfy Requirement 1.

> • As a LINC Archive user, I shall be able to render neuroglancer layers view similar to DANDI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. As a LINC user, use the `External Services` button in the `FileBrowser` to load a Neuroglancer viewer with a single layer of an asset.  This requirement mirrors the capabilities in the DANDI Archive.
```

Reviewer: This requirement may not be necessary if we proceed with WEBKNOSSOS as they would provide a mechanism for LINC users to authenticate and visualize the data.

Reviewer: As per our recent discussion, I am moving this to the first use case to address.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Implementation details

1. Provide direct access to the assets on the S3 bucket using a URI.
```

Author: Updated via a commit!

# Permissions for S3 Assets in LINC Archive

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Outlined below are 3 use cases for visualizing private assets in Neuroglancer.  In the current effort, requirements and a subsequent implementation will be developed for use cases 1 and 2.

```

Author: Updated via a commit

Collaborators: Aaron Kanzer, Kabilar Gunalan

> ## Requirements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Use cases
```

Author: Updated via a commit

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Use case 1

Use the `External Services` button in the `FileBrowser` to load a Neuroglancer viewer with a single layer of the corresponding asset. This use case extends the capabilities in the DANDI Archive to view assets in a private S3 bucket.

```

> • As a CONNECTS developer, I shall be able to view multiple datasets/layers (e.g. dMRI, tractography, HiP-CT) in the same neuroglancer
> • As a CONNECTS developer, I shall be able to view data locally or on neuroglancer
> • As a CONNECTS developer, I shall be able to have direct access to S3 asset URI
> • As a LINC Archive user, I shall be able to render neuroglancer layers view similar to DANDI

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Use case 2

Set a single Neuroglancer viewer programmatically to visualize multiple assets (e.g. dMRI, HiP-CT) as layers.

### Use case 3

Use case 2 + Load the tractography-generated streamlines (i.e. `trk` file) into memory, convert the streamlines into the Neuroglancer skeleton format, and visualize in the Neuroglancer viewer as an additional layer.
```

#### Relevant Links

https://github.com/orgs/lincbrain/projects/2?pane=issue&itemId=54650571

https://github.com/neuroscales/ngtools/blob/main/notebooks/show_tract.ipynb

https://github.com/google/neuroglancer/issues/507

## Implementation Options

> #### Issue read-only credentials for S3 bucket. Quick set up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Issue read-only credentials for S3 bucket. Quick set up.
```

Does not resolve rendering issue. Would resolve accessing the asset in Jupyter Notebook, but would require flaky Python code.

> #### Integrate read-only credentials for S3 bucket into LINC Archive, LINC CLI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Integrate read-only credentials for S3 bucket into LINC Archive, LINC CLI
```

> ###### CloudFront distribution with Origin Access Identity control for relevant S3 buckets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### CloudFront distribution with Origin Access Identity control for relevant S3 buckets
```

> 

Reviewer: <img width="946" alt="image" src="https://github.com/lincbrain/linc-archive/assets/871137/f7e79ed0-803e-4567-b0a1-c2ba78a188ff">

I converted your version of the drawio diagram shown above to a mermaid diagram suggested below so that we can integrate it in this design doc.

```mermaid
%%{init: {"flowchart": {"curve": "linear"}}}%%

flowchart LR
    E --> B
    A(User) -->| If client has CloudFront cookies from prior session, <br/> then proceed. | B(Static Webpage i.e. Neuroglancer)
    A --> | If client does not have CloudFront cookies, <br/> then GET upon /api/permissions/s3 in LINC Archive API. | E(LINC Archive API)
    B --> | Upon user activity, <br/> sends presigned cookies | C(AWS CloudFront)
    C -->| Allows data to be fetched | D(Private AWS S3 Bucket)
    D -->| 1. Neuroglancer able to access S3 data <br/> 2. Data rendered on screen | B
```

- S3 Asset Bucket is served via a CloudFront distribution

> - User hits a get_presigned_cookie/ API endpoint in LINC Archive. In the endpoint response is a valid cookie that allows the user's browser to be able to access the asset via their browser

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- User navigates to LINC Archive (i.e. `lincbrain.org`) to authenticate.  Thereby the user hits a get_presigned_cookie/ API endpoint. In the endpoint response is a valid cookie that allows the user's browser to be able to access the asset via their browser.
```

> 
> Rendering via Neuroglancer
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - (Might need to modify fork of neuroglancer to handle CloudFront asset path in same format that it handles S3 asset path)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Modify Neuroglancer back-end to handle CloudFront asset path (i.e. `neuroglancer.lincbrain.org`) in same format that it handles S3 asset path (i.e. `s3://`).
```

Author: Just for clarification, there is no "traditional" backend yet, as the code used is just static JS, HTML, CSS. If we use something like AWS Lambda and/or API Gateway, then we'd technically have a "backend"

Perhaps this could read:

```
Modify Neuroglancer source code to handle CloudFront asset path (i.e. `neuroglancer.lincbrain.org` sincethe domain of the presigned cookie are limited to `*.lincbrain.org` domains due to same-site requirements for cookies) in same format that it handles the asset similar to any S3 asset path (i.e. `s3://`).
```

Reviewer: Thanks Aaron.  I have updated my suggestion based on your feedback.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Host Neuroglancer fork on S3 bucket, and make available at `neuroglancer.lincbrain.org`.

```

Author: ```
Host Neuroglancer fork on S3 bucket, and make available at `neuroglancer.lincbrain.org`.
```

This perhaps should maybe read as:

```
Host Neuroglancer fork on S3 bucket with static site hosting enabled. Create an AWS CloudFront distribution to sit as a verified proxy for permission to many S3 assets at once via presigned cookies.  Provide CNAME for CloudFront Distribution URL to `neuroglancer.lincbrain.org` so that cookies generated by LINC Archive (also living at a `*.lincbrain.org` can be shared between the API and the Neuroglancer site.
```

Reviewer: Thanks Aaron.  I have updated by suggestion according to your feedback.

> Accessing via LINC Archive API
> 
> - Cookies would get passed in request to get asset
> - Provide LINC CLI option for retrieving asset. Instead of just referencing the asset directly, we would need to provide a helper function that wraps the request with the cookie

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Render with local Neuroglancer

- Access assets with LINC CLI
  - Cookies would get passed in request to get asset
  - Provide LINC CLI option for retrieving asset. Instead of just referencing the asset directly, we would need to provide a helper function that wraps the request with the cookie.
- Install modified Neuroglancer described above, with additional updates to the Python API.
```

#### AWS Cognito, npm AWS SDK package

TBD

#### Provide endpoint to provide pre-signed S3 Asset URLs

Blocker: Pre-signed URLs can only be generated at the object-level, not at the sub-directory level. Neuroglancer renders many
objects at once as a user zooms, scrolls, etc., thus unless we generated a pre-signed URL for each asset, this would be difficult.

#### Netlify OAuth requirement to render site

> Solves rendering issue, but does not solve accessing private S3 assets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Would pass credentials to AWS.  Solves rendering issue, but does not solve accessing private S3 assets.
```

Author: Updated via a commit!

# Visualize private S3 assets with Neuroglancer

Collaborators: Aaron Kanzer, Kabilar Gunalan

Outlined below are 3 use cases for visualizing private assets in Neuroglancer.

> In the current effort, requirements and a subsequent implementation will be developed for use cases 1 and 2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the current effort, an implementation was developed for use cases 1 and 2.
```

## Use cases

### Use case 1
Use the `External Services` button in the `FileBrowser` to load a Neuroglancer viewer with
a single layer of the corresponding asset.  The resulting URL can be shared between LINC team members.  This use case extends the capabilities in the DANDI Archive to view assets in a private S3 bucket.

### Use case 2

> Set a single Neuroglancer viewer programmatically to visualize multiple assets (e.g. dMRI, HiP-CT) as layers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set a single Neuroglancer viewer programmatically to visualize multiple assets (e.g. dMRI, HiP-CT) as layers.   See [example notebook](https://github.com/neuroscales/ngtools/blob/main/notebooks/show_tract.ipynb).
```

### Use case 3

> Use case 2 + Load the tractography-generated streamlines (i.e. `trk` file) into memory,
> convert the streamlines into the Neuroglancer skeleton format, and visualize in the Neuroglancer
> viewer as an additional layer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use case 2 + Load the tractography-generated streamlines (i.e. `trk` file) into memory,
convert the streamlines into the Neuroglancer skeleton format, and visualize in the Neuroglancer
viewer as an additional layer.  See [example notebook](https://github.com/neuroscales/ngtools/blob/main/notebooks/show_tract.ipynb).
```

## Requirements

1. Zarr archives are stored in a private AWS S3 bucket
2. Provide direct access to the LINC users of the assets on the private S3 bucket using a URI.

> #### Relevant Links

Reviewer: I have added these links to other sections, so we can remove this section.

> #### Relevant Links

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

# Visualize private S3 assets with Neuroglancer

Collaborators: Aaron Kanzer, Kabilar Gunalan

Outlined below are 3 use cases for visualizing private assets in Neuroglancer.
In the current effort, requirements and a subsequent implementation will be developed for use cases 1 and 2.

## Use cases

### Use case 1
Use the `External Services` button in the `FileBrowser` to load a Neuroglancer viewer with
a single layer of the corresponding asset.  The resulting URL can be shared between LINC team members.  This use case extends the capabilities in the DANDI Archive to view assets in a private S3 bucket.

### Use case 2
Set a single Neuroglancer viewer programmatically to visualize multiple assets (e.g. dMRI, HiP-CT) as layers.

### Use case 3
Use case 2 + Load the tractography-generated streamlines (i.e. `trk` file) into memory,
convert the streamlines into the Neuroglancer skeleton format, and visualize in the Neuroglancer
viewer as an additional layer.

## Requirements

1. Zarr archives are stored in a private AWS S3 bucket

> 2. Provide direct access to the LINC users of the assets on the private S3 bucket using a URI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Provide LINC users with direct access to the assets that are stored in the private S3 bucket using a URI.
```

## Implementation Options

### Issue read-only credentials for S3 bucket. Quick set up.

Does not resolve rendering issue. Would resolve accessing the asset in Jupyter Notebook, but would require flaky Python code.

### Integrate read-only credentials for S3 bucket into LINC Archive, LINC CLI

#### CloudFront distribution with Origin Access Identity control for relevant S3 buckets

- S3 Asset Bucket is served via a CloudFront distribution
- User navigates to LINC Archive (i.e. `lincbrain.org`) to authenticate.  Thereby the user hits a get_presigned_cookie/ API endpoint. In the endpoint response is a valid cookie that allows the user's browser to be able to access the asset via their browser.

Render with hosted Neuroglancer

> - Host Neuroglancer fork on S3 bucket with static site hosting enabled. Create an AWS CloudFront distribution to sit as a verified proxy for permission to many S3 assets at once via presigned cookies.  Provide CNAME for CloudFront Distribution URL to `neuroglancer.lincbrain.org` so that cookies generated by LINC Archive (also living at a `*.lincbrain.org`) can be shared between the API and the Neuroglancer site.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Host Neuroglancer fork on S3 bucket with static site hosting enabled. Create an AWS CloudFront distribution to sit as a verified proxy with permission to access many S3 assets at once via presigned cookies.  Provide CNAME for CloudFront Distribution URL to `neuroglancer.lincbrain.org` so that cookies generated by LINC Archive (also living at a `*.lincbrain.org`) can be shared between the API and the Neuroglancer site.
```

- Modify the Neuroglancer source code to handle a CloudFront asset path (i.e. `neuroglancer.lincbrain.org` since the domains of the presigned cookie are limited to `*.lincbrain.org` domains due to same-site requirements for cookies) that is similar to any S3 asset path (i.e. `s3://`).
- Cookies would get passed in request to get asset

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- See the #diagram section for further details on the design.

```

Access assets with LINC CLI
  - Cookies would get passed in request to get asset

>   - Provide LINC CLI option for retrieving asset. Instead of just referencing the asset directly, we would need to provide a helper function that wraps the request with the cookie.

Reviewer: Hi @aaronkanzer, was this implemented?

Author: Good catch -- it was not, removed

 CloudFront distribution with Origin Access Identity control for relevant S3 buckets

- S3 Asset Bucket is served via a CloudFront distribution

- User navigates to LINC Archive (i.e. `lincbrain.org`) to authenticate. Thereby the user hits a get_presigned_cookie/ API endpoint. In the endpoint response is a valid cookie that allows the user's browser to be able to access the asset via their browser.

Render with hosted Neuroglancer
- Host Neuroglancer fork on S3 bucket with static site hosting enabled. Create an AWS CloudFront distribution to sit as a verified proxy for permission to many S3 assets at once via presigned cookies.  Provide CNAME for CloudFront Distribution URL to `neuroglancer.lincbrain.org` so that cookies generated by LINC Archive (also living at a `*.lincbrain.org`) can be shared between the API and the Neuroglancer site.
- Modify the Neuroglancer source code to handle a CloudFront asset path (i.e. `neuroglancer.lincbrain.org` since the domains of the presigned cookie are limited to `*.lincbrain.org` domains due to same-site requirements for cookies) that is similar to any S3 asset path (i.e. `s3://`).

> - Cookies would get passed in request to get asset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Cookies would get passed in request to get asset
- Update CloudFront cache policy time to live (TTL) setting to 1 second.  Since LINC assets can be overwritten with the same filename, the CloudFront cache layer would not know to update the cache contents.  This updated policy will allow for the updated asset to be displayed correctly by Neuroglancer.
```

> https://github.com/google/neuroglancer/issues/507

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- Modify the Neuroglancer source code to handle a CloudFront asset path (i.e. `neuroglancer.lincbrain.org` since the domains of the presigned cookie are limited to `*.lincbrain.org` domains due to same-site requirements for cookies) that is similar to any S3 asset path (i.e. `s3://`).
- Cookies would get passed in request to get asset

Access assets with LINC CLI
  - Cookies would get passed in request to get asset
  - Provide LINC CLI option for retrieving asset. Instead of just referencing the asset directly, we would need to provide a helper function that wraps the request with the cookie.

Architecture diagram
```mermaid
%%{init: {"flowchart": {"curve": "linear"}}}%%
flowchart LR
    E --> B
    A(User) -->| If client has CloudFront cookies from prior session, <br/> then proceed. | B(Static Webpage i.e. Neuroglancer)
    A --> | If client does not have CloudFront cookies, <br/> then GET upon /api/permissions/s3 in LINC Archive API. | E(LINC Archive API)
    B --> | Upon user activity, <br/> sends presigned cookies | C(AWS CloudFront)
    C -->| Allows data to be fetched | D(Private AWS S3 Bucket)

>     D -->| 1. Neuroglancer able to access S3 data <br/> 2. Data rendered on screen | B

Reviewer: Please add a closing to the code block (i.e. ```).  GitHub suggestions does not know how to handle this suggestion.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

> ## Implementation Options
> 

Reviewer: Moved from below into a new `Implemented solution` section.

```suggestion
## Implemented solution

- S3 Asset Bucket is served via a CloudFront distribution

- User navigates to LINC Archive (i.e. `lincbrain.org`) to authenticate. Thereby the user hits a get_presigned_cookie/ API endpoint. In the endpoint response is a valid cookie that allows the user's browser to be able to access the asset via their browser.

Render with hosted Neuroglancer
- Host Neuroglancer fork on S3 bucket with static site hosting enabled. Create an AWS CloudFront distribution to sit as a verified proxy for permission to many S3 assets at once via presigned cookies.  Provide CNAME for CloudFront Distribution URL to `neuroglancer.lincbrain.org` so that cookies generated by LINC Archive (also living at a `*.lincbrain.org`) can be shared between the API and the Neuroglancer site.
- Modify the Neuroglancer source code to handle a CloudFront asset path (i.e. `neuroglancer.lincbrain.org` since the domains of the presigned cookie are limited to `*.lincbrain.org` domains due to same-site requirements for cookies) that is similar to any S3 asset path (i.e. `s3://`).
- Cookies would get passed in request to get asset

Access assets with LINC CLI
  - Cookies would get passed in request to get asset
  - Provide LINC CLI option for retrieving asset. Instead of just referencing the asset directly, we would need to provide a helper function that wraps the request with the cookie.

Architecture diagram
```mermaid
%%{init: {"flowchart": {"curve": "linear"}}}%%
flowchart LR
    E --> B
    A(User) -->| If client has CloudFront cookies from prior session, <br/> then proceed. | B(Static Webpage i.e. Neuroglancer)
    A --> | If client does not have CloudFront cookies, <br/> then GET upon /api/permissions/s3 in LINC Archive API. | E(LINC Archive API)
    B --> | Upon user activity, <br/> sends presigned cookies | C(AWS CloudFront)
    C -->| Allows data to be fetched | D(Private AWS S3 Bucket)
    D -->| 1. Neuroglancer able to access S3 data <br/> 2. Data rendered on screen | B
```

## Alternative options

```

### Issue read-only credentials for S3 bucket. Quick set up.

Does not resolve rendering issue. Would resolve accessing the asset in Jupyter Notebook, but would require flaky Python code.

### Integrate read-only credentials for S3 bucket into LINC Archive, LINC CLI

> #### CloudFront distribution with Origin Access Identity control for relevant S3 buckets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - S3 Asset Bucket is served via a CloudFront distribution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - User navigates to LINC Archive (i.e. `lincbrain.org`) to authenticate.  Thereby the user hits a get_presigned_cookie/ API endpoint. In the endpoint response is a valid cookie that allows the user's browser to be able to access the asset via their browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Render with hosted Neuroglancer
> - Host Neuroglancer fork on S3 bucket with static site hosting enabled. Create an AWS CloudFront distribution to sit as a verified proxy for permission to many S3 assets at once via presigned cookies.  Provide CNAME for CloudFront Distribution URL to `neuroglancer.lincbrain.org` so that cookies generated by LINC Archive (also living at a `*.lincbrain.org`) can be shared between the API and the Neuroglancer site.
> - Modify the Neuroglancer source code to handle a CloudFront asset path (i.e. `neuroglancer.lincbrain.org` since the domains of the presigned cookie are limited to `*.lincbrain.org` domains due to same-site requirements for cookies) that is similar to any S3 asset path (i.e. `s3://`).
> - Cookies would get passed in request to get asset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Access assets with LINC CLI
>   - Cookies would get passed in request to get asset
>   - Provide LINC CLI option for retrieving asset. Instead of just referencing the asset directly, we would need to provide a helper function that wraps the request with the cookie.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

#### Netlify OAuth requirement to render site

Would pass credentials to AWS.  Solves rendering issue, but does not solve accessing private S3 assets.

#### Diagram

```mermaid
%%{init: {"flowchart": {"curve": "linear"}}}%%
flowchart LR

>     %% E --> B

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

#### Netlify OAuth requirement to render site

Would pass credentials to AWS.  Solves rendering issue, but does not solve accessing private S3 assets.

#### Diagram

```mermaid

> %%{init: {"flowchart": {"curve": "linear"}}}%%
> flowchart LR
>     E --> B
>     A(User) -->| If client has CloudFront cookies from prior session, <br/> then proceed. | B(Static Webpage i.e. Neuroglancer)
>     A --> | If client does not have CloudFront cookies, <br/> then GET upon /api/permissions/s3 in LINC Archive API. | E(LINC Archive API)
>     B --> | Upon user activity, <br/> sends presigned cookies | C(AWS CloudFront)
>     C -->| Allows data to be fetched | D(Private AWS S3 Bucket)
>     D -->| 1. Neuroglancer able to access S3 data <br/> 2. Data rendered on screen | B

Reviewer: The below suggestion fixes the rendering issue and simplifies the diagram.

```suggestion
%%{init: {"flowchart": {"curve": "linear"}}}%%
flowchart LR
    %% E --> B
    A(User) --> B{Does client have CloudFront cookies from a prior session?}
    B -- No --> C(LINC Archive API <br/> GET request /api/permissions/s3/)
    B -- Yes --> D(Static Neuroglancer Webpage)
    C --> D
    D -- Send presigned cookies --> E(AWS CloudFront)
    E --> F(Private AWS S3 Bucket)
    F -- Neuroglancer able to access S3 data and render on screen. --> D
```

#### Netlify OAuth requirement to render site

Would pass credentials to AWS.  Solves rendering issue, but does not solve accessing private S3 assets.

> 
> #### Diagram
> 
> ```mermaid
> %%{init: {"flowchart": {"curve": "linear"}}}%%
> flowchart LR
>     E --> B
>     A(User) -->| If client has CloudFront cookies from prior session, <br/> then proceed. | B(Static Webpage i.e. Neuroglancer)
>     A --> | If client does not have CloudFront cookies, <br/> then GET upon /api/permissions/s3 in LINC Archive API. | E(LINC Archive API)
>     B --> | Upon user activity, <br/> sends presigned cookies | C(AWS CloudFront)
>     C -->| Allows data to be fetched | D(Private AWS S3 Bucket)
>     D -->| 1. Neuroglancer able to access S3 data <br/> 2. Data rendered on screen | B

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
